One, two, three, four, five, one, two, three.
Thursday, June 14, testing, testing.
Today we're in the Dean's Conference Room in the College of Veterinary Medicine.
Have the pleasure again to record the memories of Professor J.D.
McCready, particularly about the College of Veterinary Medicine.
J.D., first summarize your experience.
you graduated when and then what did you do between then
and the time you were brought back here as a member of the professional staff and faculty.
All right.
I finished A&M first off in 1952, a degree in agricultural education.
Then left and went to Korean conflict as a commissioned officer and mustered out in August of 54.
In the interim, I had applied to the College of Veterinary Medicine, which was not so complex as it is now, but was finally accepted in College of Veterinary Medicine
when I mustered out of the Air Force and began veterinary education in 1954, having completed my DVM in 1958.
Upon completion, I had
I thought that I was going into private practice and had a job offer in Wharton, Texas.
The day I went, the week before I went to interview for that job, Dr. P.W.
Burns, head of the Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, with whom I worked as a student.
came to me and asked me if I would join the faculty in September of 54, of 58.
And I told him, well, I had a job interview in San Antonio and one in Wharton and one in Lake Jackson.
This was over Easter holidays.
And so I made the rounds and
was offered a job in Wharton, Texas.
And Dr. Burns came to me on a Monday.
I needed to let the people in Wharton know on that Monday.
And that morning he asked me to please forego practice till I could help him out for at least a year.
So with that admonition, and couldn't start till September as far as teaching,
I went to Beaumont, Texas and went into private practice with Dr. John Coven at the Port Arthur Road Veterinary Hospital.
And he'd take that road north of there and go to a place kind of in the sticks called Orange, Texas.
But anyhow, I worked there with Dr. Coven.
all that summer, and he offered me a position at the end of my first year at A&M to come back as a partner in the practice.
And I told him that I simply had to see, but I thought that I would not want to be at A&M very long.
So I came back in September with just a textbook that I bought at the store, and that's all the background I had in physiology, and tried to stay a lecture ahead of my students because we were not trained.
specialties then and of course we I had a degree in education a bachelor's degree in education which was helpful and so I began teaching veterinary physiology to the veterinary students we had
The only dollar question we're going to ask, what was your beginning salary?
$300 a month.
Twelve months?
Twelve months.
What were the students like then as students from your point of view as a faculty member?
We had 64 students per class, where we finally had 128 now.
But they, again, were highly selected students and very nice to work with and highly motivated.
And the person teaching College of Veterinary Medicine really
has such a fine environment as far as students that most of them would not appreciate what people have to do over on campus or in the other parts of the university with students that you anticipate losing with.
Mr. Rudder told us that there would be 50 percent attrition for those that entered.
In veterinary school we, normally out of class of 64, we never lost but about four or five
due to grades, and one year Dr. Gibbs and I were teaching kind of, not against each other, but in his course and my course in that first year, and I lost 14 students, but that was just, they had a hard time keeping up with physiology and anatomy.
Now this first year was the fall of 1958.
Were, in terms of their background,
Were they mostly rural or urban?
Well, we had variable background in those young people in that.
Of course, I wasn't much older than they were, but we had a contract with Louisiana to take about eight or nine Louisiana students.
Out of the 64, we had the top eight or nine from Louisiana, and they were exceptional students.
Then we had a number of former service people who had come back in to interventional medicine, and they were mature.
They all, they all had good academic records before they came into the curriculum, into the veterinary curriculum, so I thought they were exceptional students, and of course the thing you appreciated was that, I appreciated was that they accepted me as a faculty member with
very little expertise and elected me to head up their student AVMA program as faculty advisor and such as that, which just to be accepted was, I thought, a remarkable event.
As a new faculty member, did anybody
the department head, the dean, or anybody else give you any advice and guidance about what to do, not to do, how to do it?
None whatsoever.
In the years that I taught under Dr. Burns' tutelage, and he never, you know, the class met and nothing was ever said.
There was only one
time he ever said anything to me and he, as far as curriculum, he said that I needed to spend more time in covering the circulation of the horse's hoof.
That's the only comment he ever made to me in the years that I worked for him.
What did that, that first course or courses you were teaching, what did that cover?
Well, we, it was a two semester series of courses.
Our department had two semesters of physiology, two semesters of pharmacology, and a semester of toxicology in it.
And I taught the physiology, and Dr. Dick Davis taught the pharmacology, and Dr. Burns taught the toxicology.
I had the first semester, I had five lectures a week and two laboratories.
Second semester, I had four lectures, three lectures a week,
and four laboratories.
I had no laboratory assistants, no technicians.
We used lots of live animals.
And I used lots of dogs and I would go, I'd lecture that morning, I'd go to the pound at lunch and pick up pound dogs, put them in toe sacks, put them in my truck or in my car, bring them back to the
to the department, bring them upstairs myself, and have them ready for the students when they got there at two o'clock.
And that was, we just did, we knew no better about having assistance or laboratory animal care or any type of
lab animal instruction.
We just kind of took off the streets what we could get.
Describe your, in those early years, your routine for a typical work day.
Got up, what time got here, did what, what time did you go home?
Well, my typical routine for the first several years was to try to be in the office by 7, 7.30 and
quite frequently.
I stayed till 10 or midnight because I had to prepare for my labs the next day and for my lectures.
And, you know, laboratory preparation was difficult because you didn't have any help.
You had to get all the anesthetic agents out and all the
drugs that you were going to use and all the equipment you were going to require to vent and get the laboratory notes prepared, which you did then on just any type of reproduction, a ditto machine or something.
And so I never got home until at least 10 o'clock in the evening.
Where'd you have lunch and supper?
I ate lunch in my office.
Where'd you take it?
Where'd you buy it?
Where?
Oh, usually it was a sandwich or something that I brought from home.
It was, I had one o'clock lectures.
All the time I lectured it was at one o'clock in all my courses.
And Dr. Ed McMurray, I never could get him to take me off one o'clock lectures.
And he said, well people just enjoy physiology better than anything else if we're going to keep it at one o'clock.
So I would go up down something and then go to lecture and then right after lecture I'd go down and get my labs underway and we had very
minimum equipment then for physiologic recording, etc.
My labs I had to make up as I went along.
If we were studying blood and circulation or respiration or digestion or any of those events, I'd have to dream up a lab where they could visualize that particular system.
And all of this was both large and small animal?
Yes, large, small animal, all species.
And describe the facilities that were available to you then.
Well, we had two laboratory rooms at that time.
They were equipped for dual-purpose chemistries and for recording physiologic data.
At that time we were using Chimograph for physiologic recording, which was a smoke drum with a stylus.
You couldn't record a whole lot.
But we had a room in which the students smoked the drum and they went in and recorded data off of it and then took it back into that room and dipped it in shellac and so-called fixed it for a future reference.
But our facilities at that time were, oh, they were good.
I mean, this was a new building.
But compared to now, they were, would have been.
The vet school at that time consisted of what structures, what buildings?
Well, at that time, I, we had this, the basic sciences building was opened in about 19...
55 or 56.
The clinics had opened first of all the buildings.
So we had a small library down in the clinic that opened in 54, and the basic sciences building, I think, opened about 56.
And y'all were the only instructional facilities west of the railroad?
Mm-hmm.
At that time, you know, there was, we had been on campus.
I took my undergraduate, or my first year or so of veterinary school on the main, what we call the main campus.
And, of course, with the campus growing, et cetera, and us having horses and cows and everything else, they wanted us off of the main campus, and so they moved us.
across the tracks and we were the only thing out here.
And of course it didn't take very many years until we were again surrounded by everything from the Bush Library to the medical school to the business college and gosh, biochem and animal science and agronomy and everything else.
But we again became fairly surrounded except we
I have reserved a block of land of probably a couple hundred acres that gives us a buffer system that we probably won't have to move for another few years.
Now, when you joined the faculty, you were married.
Yeah, I was married.
And where did you all find a place to live and how much did it cost?
Well, when I first came to the university,
to a veterinary college.
I had a GI Bill and I bought a house on Cooner Street, a small house, two-bedroom house for I think $10,000 or $12,000.
The payments on the house were $26,000, $27,000 a month.
including taxes and principal and insurance and the whole bit.
And I lived there, and even I kept that house and lived there when I first started teaching.
It wasn't until later on in about 1960 or so that we bought a little house.
That was on Cooner, and we bought a house over on Marstella Street, ironically.
As you became a faculty member,
Were there any veterinary faculty family events where husbands and wives got together?
No, no events.
The only thing that was probably an activity that was
had two, I'd say, two activities.
One was that the faculty wives had a monthly meeting, and they were active, lots more than they are now.
They're essentially not active now.
And then the student chapter had the student AVMA, which brought in guest speakers about
twice a month, and the faculty were expected to attend those student meetings.
And those were about the only thing.
We didn't have seminars or college-wide events at all.
Describe the college organizationally.
I guess it was the school then, wasn't it?
Yeah, it was the School of Veterinary Medicine.
When you joined the faculty, describe your department and who were the key members of it, and then the general veterinary faculty, who were the key people?
Well, let me just start from the top down.
Of course, we had a dean, and the first dean that I was familiar with was Boughton, and he's the one that told me I ought to go on to the Air Force and serve my time and then come back to the next school.
That's B-O-U-G-H, T-O-N?
T-O-N.
And after Dr. Boughton, Ivan Boughton died, well then, Dr.
Bill Armistead became dean and was dean for four or five of the years when I was a student.
And then I think about my senior year or thereabouts, he left and went to Michigan State and Dr. A.A.
Price from the anatomy department became dean and after 15 years he came back to the physiology department where he got his master's degree.
But we had a straight line item administration, as I mentioned earlier, from the president of the university, no real vice presidents or provost or anything, to the dean of the college, to the department head.
And the department heads essentially
ran the university because they did faculty selection, curriculum.
The whole gamut was done by the department heads.
And we had the department heads function at the university as a group through the academic council.
But College of Veterinary Medicine, we had a dean, and we had seven, six department heads.
Of those department heads, who were the most influential?
Well, the department heads that were here when I came are the ones that were really responsible for the foundation of this college or this school.
You had Dr. A. A. Leonard over in the clinics.
You had Dr. Beemer in the small animal clinic, Dr. Leonard in the large animal clinic.
You had Dr. John Milliff who headed up anatomy.
You had Dr. P.W.
Burns that headed up physiology, pharmacology, toxicology.
You had Dr. R.D.
Turk who headed up parasitology.
And you had Dr. Fred Jagge that headed up public health.
And then you had...
trying to figure who was the head at that time of veterinary microbiology.
Dr. Hilton Smith headed up veterinary pathology and let me see I can't I don't remember the person that headed up
a microbiologist, John Delaplane, died acutely of a heart attack, I think, here at the college in, oh, I don't know, probably 58 or 59 or something like that.
But that group, those people
are the ones that are really responsible, the foundation, the whole bit as far as the College of Veterinary Medicine, Texas University.
They set the standards.
They were high moral character, ethical, and very, very stern and strict in their reward system.
yet they only had one objective, and that was to turn out the best veterinary practitioners they could.
There was no sense of no research in the school at that time.
But these people, they put down the foundation that the rest of the school and then the college was built upon.
As you look back now with clear eyes of judgment,
What were the strengths, and if there were any weaknesses, what were the weaknesses of the College of the School of Veterinary Medicine in the late 50s?
Well,
The strengths of the college were that we had this core faculty, department heads.
At that time, most departments just consisted of the department head and one or maybe two other faculty.
But those gentlemen did all of putting the thing together and planning and all of that.
And so the strength at that time was to provide education.
There was very little thought about research or publishing or anything else.
The only person that did any publishing
at that time of any significance, I suppose, was Dr. Hilton Smith, who wrote the text on veterinary pathology and still was used for many, many years.
He was a scholarly type, but not research-oriented.
So I guess our
lack of research objectives and lack of funding, small staff, lack of support staff, technical staff, facilities for our animals,
no air conditioning in the buildings, unpaved streets that led to the building.
It was rather archaic, to say the least.
Describe this man, Al Price, as much as you can.
Well, Dr. Price,
was a unique individual.
First time I met Dr. Price, I returned from the Air Force to the Inter-Veterinary School and was told when I hadn't been back to the campus in several years, so they told me the veterinary school was located across the railroad track.
So the first morning of classes, I proceeded to go across the tracks and look for my course in anatomy, veterinary anatomy, and I was told the basic sciences were still being taught on campus.
So I go back to campus and find the building.
There was a little building at that time.
It was part of the veterinary complex called the anatomy building.
And so I was supposed to have been in
gross anatomy that morning, and I got there probably thirty, forty minutes late, and Dr. A. A. Price was taught gross anatomy, small animal anatomy, and there were, in this room, there were blackboards all the way around the room, and he had
written nearly and filled nearly every blackboard in my absence with the characteristics of bone formation.
And so there I started out way behind
not even knowing where I was supposed to go to class.
And then there was this articulate professor, Dr. A. A. Price, just writing and talking and going as fast as he could.
We had no textbook for that.
And so after that first ordeal,
my thoughts were that probably I'd come to the wrong place at the wrong time.
So I told my wife I'd try it a week and if I didn't like it we'd go to work.
But Dr. Price was
He had a good background.
He had a military background.
Actually, he had finished Veterinary College, was a good student, excellent teacher.
And oh, in 19...
58 or 59 or sometime in there.
He was, when Dr. Armistead left for Michigan State, he was promoted to dean.
And he was fairly young at that time.
Do you remember any reaction around here to his selection?
No.
He was, I think he was, about that time, he was president of the Texas Veterinary Medical Association also.
And so he had a good rapport with the, with the clinicians in the state and was certainly well thought of by the faculty.
And, of course, he had the support of Dr.
who, if you had his backing, you were in good state to begin with.
But he was very, he was very stern in his teaching.
He was a few
If you were a quarter of a point away from a certain grade average or what have you, if you had a 91.45, you didn't get an A. At that time, 92 was an A, 84 was a B, 76 was a C.
He was critical in grading, but he was fair.
He, again, was teacher-oriented even after he became dean, and he realized our lack of research
And that's when he hired an associate dean for research at that time.
The first we had was Dr. Fred Maurer.
And he also
finally had an assistant to the dean part-time, which was Dr. Ed McMurray.
And so again, Al was the one that had the foresight.
We had a critical charge of veterinarians at that time in the United States.
He had the foresight to recommend doubling our classes from 64 to 128 students.
He used this as leverage to build a new basic sciences building and some more clinical facilities.
And it happened at a time when the federal government started giving monies to try to stimulate increased student enrollment in veterinary medicine.
And so we got, we were the only one in the United States that
that Dr. Price didn't know at the time what it was going to amount to, but we know that most of the veterinary schools increased their enrollment four, five, or six students, and we doubled our 64 students, and so we got
Federal dollars for those 64 students over, probably, that continued for eight, nine, ten years, which brought in a good source of revenue for the college.
We were able to upgrade our laboratories and so forth.
Dr. Price's nickname from the students is Slick Owl.
Why?